---
layout: post
excerpt: ' EXCERPT. '

title:  "TITLE"
date:   2022-01-22 00:00:00
categories: Brief
tags: 
picid: "a000"
tweetURL: https://twitter.com/EpsilonPraxis
---

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/a002.jpg'  'Pablo Picasso, 1909-10, *Figure dans un Fauteuil (Seated Nude, Femme nue assise)*, oil on canvas, 92.1 x 73 cm, Tate Modern, London' %} 

>‘You know, you never beat us on the battlefield,’ I told my North Vietnamese counterpart during negotiations in Hanoi a week before the fall of Saigon. He pondered that remark a moment and then replied, ‘That may be so, but it is also irrelevant.’
>
>{% cite 'Person' 'source' '(1998)' %}

{%newthought '  '%} words

{% marginfigure 'mf-id-1' 'assets/img/a003.png'  %} 

{% marginnote 'mn-id-1' 'note' '' %} 



https://twitter.com/maxbergmann/status/1500634443232563203

china

new tupo

watching zelenskyy tv show, kvartal, dying for liberal values

https://mil.in.ua/en/news/brave-new-world-of-putin-an-article-by-the-propaganda-publication-ria-novosti-which-was-to-be-published-after-the-occupation-of-ukraine/



https://web.archive.org/web/20220226051154/https://ria.ru/20220226/rossiya-1775162336.html



https://adamtooze.substack.com/p/chartbook-91-what-if-putins-war-regime?s=w



The Schlieffen Plan was a *beautiful* plan. Note that I did not say it was a *good* plan.





Spoiler alert for the end of this essay: Zelenskyy caused the Russo-Ukrainian War.

Even after more than a week of fighting, the Russian political objectives for this war remain mysterious. 

We know exactly how the battle plans for the first few days unfolded. Small, separated detachments of Russian troops raced down Ukrainian roads to seize main junctures and small towns, while completely bypassing every large city with one notable exception—a mad dash into Kyiv. More “thunder run” than blitzkrieg, the Russian military had sent but a fraction of its total strength haphazardly in the first few days, like shooting marbles into a giant pinball machine hoping for a jackpot.

From this, we can infer that Putin anticipated taking Kyiv with a token force with little logistical support and missile strikes from afar after only a few days.

Quite frankly, even for a case of war optimism, this is insane. Even assuming that the Russian military acted without any of the embarrassing, tactical failures it has shown on the field thus far, this plan clearly has major holes in it. Even on a good day, Russian road logistics are not great. The speed of the advance ensured complete failure should any Ukrainian resistance materialize. And if they were committed to using shock-and-awe to wow the Ukrainians into surrender, it certainly made no sense to withhold most of the shock—the full might of its aircraft and artillery lay idle across the border—before the awe.

That all of the Russian high command signed off on this plan and prepared for invasion for as early as November is simply bonkers.

It’s also at odds with how careful Putin has been in previous conflicts, such as the Syrian intervention, against adversaries he certainly thought of as lesser than the Ukrainians (fellow Slavs and major fighting force within the Red Army in WW2). Various commenters have chalked it up to Putin being unhinged or high on his supply of propaganda, where Ukrainians are portrayed as a brother people to be liberated from the oppression of a Neo-Nazi regime. A more charitable explanation imagines a personal echo chamber created by Putin’s inner circle that enables his poor decision-making.

Really? Is the decision-making process for hitting off the largest war in recent history on the largest country in Europe—right along the borders of NATO—so slipshod?

Given the dismal result so far, it’s hard to imagine this strategy ever working. But what if we try?

Let’s rewind back to the early invasion. You are Ukraine’s leader. A country with ten times your military budget has been massing armies at your borders for months now. They can attack you from any axis, North (Belarus), Northeast (Belgorod), East (Donetsk/Luhansk), Southeast (Crimea), or South (Black Sea). They have all the new toys, all sorts of terrifying missiles and drones, and specialized equipment to jam communications through electronic warfare. You pray that this is all a bluff, but you dread that it might not be.

The unthinkable finally happens. Russian troops pour rapidly into the country, ensuring that nowhere, save the West, is safe from attack. You receive a call from the Russians.

They tell you the invasion is quite real—not a bluff.

They have sent only a puny force across Ukraine’s borders, but there are massive reserves and capabilities across the border that have not entered the fight yet.

To resist now would be to tempt fate. To drive their point home, they punitively shell Kharkhiv to give its citizens a taste of what war is.

Surely you would not like the full thing. To continue the fight would be to displace millions of your people as refugees, mobilize the remaining millions to fight, and reduce your cities and economies to ash.

And the Americans and Europeans? Surely, they would condemn it all with sanctions, but they will not fight your war for you. Ukraine would fight alone. Against an exponentially larger military.

The conditions are simple. The Russians have no interest in governing Ukraine. They simply want to do business as usual, in the old days before 2014. A time when successive Ukrainian governments played their cards right and remained neutral, that is to say, always offering Russian a strategic veto in their politics.

If any American or European political leader were given this offer, they would take it in a heartbeat. They would agonize, though, about how to sell it to their people. No problem, the Russians offer to help. The Ukrainian people would quickly forget their outrage and breathe a sigh of relief as the Russian tanks rolled back to their home bases. The expansion of the separatist regions here and there—maybe even some official Russian recognition of some breakaway regions—would be little noticed.

The Russian objective would not be regime change but the preservation of a pre-2014 regime that was temporarily lost. If Kyiv agreed with Moscow on “remaining neutral”, the invasion would be but a reminder. The government of Kyiv would once again have a healthy appreciation of the Russian threat, and internalize Russian interests within their democracy. No one would be assassinated and all the politicians get to keep their jobs. 

You know who wouldn’t take this deal? A Ukrainian.

I recently started watching Zelenskyy’s TV series, *Servant of the People*, where he plays a history teacher who somewhat accidentally gets elected to be Ukraine’s president. It is a very honest show (read: cynical) that still manages to maintain a sense of belief in a better future.

For Ukraine, remaining neutral means something very specific. It means understanding that you can be invaded the moment that you undertake a reform that could conceivably be perceived as threatening the geopolitical interests of nations who wish to subjugate you. It means turning a blind eye to the oligarchs who choke your country, because those oligarchs are the tools through which that same foreign interest guarantees its interests within your country. The most that Ukraine can aspire to, while remaining neutral, is to become a farm and factory that feeds the sclerotic Russian economy—a strategic patch of real estate to project Russian interests.

Zelenskyy refused the deal.

The Ukrainian military, which had been preparing for a full-scale Russian invasion since 2016 refused the deal. Every civilian that volunteered for the war effort, many of whom whose livelihoods will be reduced to ash in a charred husk of a country, refused the deal.

We often talk about how the US, by pursuing a policy of NATO eastward expansion that did not take Russian interests into account while it was vulnerable, made war inevitable. I mostly agree. Anyone with some understanding of geopolitics, Russia, or both, cringed at how simultaneously naïve, arrogant, and reckless America’s policy on Russia was, across every single Presidential administration following the Cold War. Russia has a legitimate bone to pick here.

So it isn’t Russia’s fault. 

Zelenskyy caused the Russo-Ukrainian War. But he only did so because Russia pursued a policy of westward invasion while Ukraine was vulnerable. Turn-about is fair play.

Слава Україні! Героям слава!







Russian forces peeled off half of the Donbass in 2014. Russian forces besieged Kyiv in 2022. What next?



 



You’d think that Russian political objectives

The Russo-Ukrainian War is one of the



## What does Russia want?





## What does America want?



## What does Ukraine want?





























<!-- 

sd

-->
